How was the United States formed? What
happens after a revolution is won, but
the peace solves nothing? How did 13
separate states, divided by interests,
geography, and ambition, choose to
become a single nation at all? Why did
men who had just fought together begin
turning against one another almost
immediately? And how close [music]
did the new republic come to collapsing
before it had truly begun? To understand
the full story of how the United States
was formed, we have to go back to the
fragile aftermath of victory.
On March 15th, 1783,
General George Washington addressed his
men at Newburgh as they were on the
verge of revolt. Congress has not paid
them, and now the pensions they'd been
promised were being thrown into doubt.
Officers and their men were ready to
overthrow the new American system when
it had barely begun. But Washington
appealed to their honor and their
patriotism, urging them to trust in the
fragile new political system that the
revolution had only recently created.
Washington's speech alone did not
immediately [music] calm the crowd. It
was only when he took out a letter, and
struggling to read it, acknowledged his
failing eyesight that the officers were
visibly moved. "Gentlemen, you must
pardon me. I have grown not only gray,
but almost blind in the service of my
country." This emotional moment, more
than his speech, softened their resolve
and convinced them to remain loyal. The
Revolutionary War was won, but building
a new nation from the ashes would be an
immense challenge. In this series of
videos, we will chart the early history
of the United States as revolutionary
ideals were transformed into the
foundations of a powerful nation. We see
how it navigated its earliest challenges
and meet the men who forged that path
through those first formative years.
The Articles of Confederation.
In 1783,
the United States was organized under
the Articles of Confederation.
The federal government was headed by a
single-chambered Congress with the power
to manage foreign affairs, declare war,
and handle relations with the Native
Americans, but little else. States
controlled virtually everything else,
including trade and taxes. The articles
didn't have a place for a king or a man
approximating one. Washington was well
aware of this. As the most popular man
in the states and with full control of
its military, Washington could easily
have swept away the fledgling Republican
government and asserted his rule like so
many men before him. Instead, in
December 1783,
he rode into Annapolis where Congress
was meeting and relinquished all of his
power to them.
"Having now finished the work assigned
me, I retire from the great theater of
action and bidding an affectionate
farewell to this august body under whose
orders I have so long acted, I here
offer my commission and take my leave of
all the employments of public life." It
was an intentionally eye-catching
surrender of military power to civil.
Delivering Congress's official reply,
Thomas Jefferson gratefully thanked
Washington for his humility.
"You have conducted the great military
contest with wisdom [music] and
fortitude, invariably regarding the
rights of the civil power through all
disasters and changes.
As the revolution's hero retired to his
estates [music] in Mount Vernon, the
fate of the country now lay in
Congress's hands.
Challenges of a new nation.
>> [snorts]
>> Unfortunately,
it was soon obvious that Congress could
not effectively meet every challenge
facing it. The most immediate issue was
economic. The US had a total debt of
approximately $77 million,
including $40 million in domestic debt
and $12 million owed to France and the
Netherlands with the remainder due to
individual states.
However, it had no powers to enforce
taxes or regulate trade, which were both
reserved to the states. The states were
unenthusiastic at the idea of sending
off their revenue to service the federal
government's debt. When Congress tried
to implement an impost, a sort of tax on
trade, which would require the consent
of the states, New York, Pennsylvania,
and Rhode Island all blocked it, leaving
Congress impotent and unable to meet its
financial demands.
Within the states, the revolution had
caused significant economic disruption.
Trade with the West Indies and England
had been vital for several states,
especially in New England, and their
economies were slow to recover. It is no
wonder that they weren't happy to kick
extra money to Congress. Congress at
least had broad powers in foreign
relations, but here too, they struggled.
Britain still commanded a lot of
economic [music] might and territory in
the Americas that were initially denied
to the the States. Britain continued to
occupy strategic positions in the West
that blocked American travel and trade
into the interior while shutting them
out of the lucrative ports of the
Caribbean. Spain was no ally either,
shutting down US navigation [music]
rights along the Mississippi, which
Congress tried and failed to regain via
diplomacy in 1786.
Even France had become frustrated with
the new nation, mostly due to Congress's
inability to pay the interest on their
massive war debts in 1785.
Every major European seemed to have a
bone to pick with them. So much so that
Founding Father John Jay lamented that
the US had become the sport of European
politics.
For a nation conceived in rebellion
against tyranny, there were many who had
no sympathy for Congress's struggles.
There was a deep skepticism of any form
of centralized government after 1783,
and the states jealously guarded their
power. Uncertainty, impotence, and
pessimism [music]
were the rules of the day.
Westward expansion.
If Congress had one success in those
early years, it was addressing the
settlement problem [music] in the
unsettled territories. The unorganized
territories in the Northwest, which
would one day become Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin
needed to be properly managed. There
were plenty [music]
of settlers eager to claim lands there,
so Congress passed laws to govern future
settlement. Thomas Jefferson led the way
in making arrangements for the Northwest
Ordinances of 1784 and 1787,
which laid down strict rules for these
new societies. Land would be divided
into townships of 6 square miles each,
further divided into 36 sections of 640
acres each. Lot 16 was specifically
reserved for public schools, while other
sections were set aside for federal use
or sold to settlers at $1 per acre.
[music]
Jefferson had been warmed to the idea of
giving the lands to freeholders at no
cost, but the government's dismal
finances meant they had no choice but to
demand payment at no more than $1 per
acre. The ordinances also laid down
government arrangements. New territories
would receive an appointed governor
until such time as it was large enough
to apply for full statehood. At that
point, the new state could be admitted
to the Union on equal terms to the
existing 13 states with an elected
government of their own. In a period
that saw constant federal failure, the
ordinances were a rare sign of success.
They proved that Congress could, when
given the proper powers, provide
successful solutions.
Visions of a new America.
Still, the states had to solve most of
their own problems for now. This was so
in March of 1785
when Maryland and Virginia held the
Mount Vernon Conference to peacefully
resolve a long-standing dispute over the
Potomac River. This example of
interstate cooperation outside the
structures laid down by the Articles of
Confederation impressed men like James
Madison, who saw in it a model for
interstate cooperation on matters of
trade and [music] taxation. Seeking to
emulate their success, Congress summoned
a convention to discuss expanding its
powers over economic affairs. The
convention opened at Annapolis in
September of 1786, but only five states
were in attendance.
The delegates from other states were so
late or weren't coming at all that they
were forced to postpone the convention
until May of the following year.
Angry at high taxes, economic
depression, foreclosures on farms, and
the refusal to issue paper currency,
farmers and veterans in Massachusetts
took up arms against the state
government. Shays' Rebellion, named for
one of its leaders, Daniel Shays, proved
that the current American system was
unworkable. Common people were so
unhappy that they were rising up in
revolt, while Congress had virtually no
effective power to respond to it.
Massachusetts state militia were called
in to put down the rebels, which they
did after a series of small clashes by
February 1787. Although it did not last
long and left only nine people dead,
Shays' Rebellion shattered confidence in
the Articles of Confederation across the
colonies. Change was desperately needed
before far worse unrest could break out.
The Constitutional Convention.
>> [snorts]
>> It was in this mindset that the 55
delegates of the Constitutional
Convention met at Philadelphia in May
1787.
Among them were James Madison, Alexander
Hamilton, Benjamin Franklin, and a host
of other prominent early Americans who
over the next four months would hammer
out their vision for a Constitution of
the United States. Even Washington was
convinced to attend, if only so that his
absence [music] wouldn't be taken as
some sign of disapproval of the new
government's arrangements. The
convention needed to tackle several key
issues. They needed a federal government
that was capable of handling the
nation's finances and disputes between
states. They had to decide where state
power stopped and federal power began.
This new government needed to be strong
enough to respond to crises like Shays'
Rebellion without remaking a tyranny
like the one they just gotten rid of. It
also needed to settle the question of
how its legislature would be elected.
Smaller states like New Jersey wanted a
system where representation was given to
all states equally, [music] while larger
states like Virginia demanded
representation based on population. That
left another question. What of the
slaves? Would states gain more electoral
power the more slaves [music] they
owned?
The system they devised is one of the
most famous and long-standing political
systems in history. The Constitution of
the United States called for three
branches [music] of government, a
legislature to make laws, an executive
to implement them, and a judiciary to
adjudicate them. Each branch was
designed to check and balance the
others. Each branch also had strictly
enumerated powers, and anything not
explicitly given to them in the
Constitution belonged to the states by
default.
To compromise between the demands of
large and small states, the legislature
in Congress would be split into the
House of Representatives with power
given to states based on population, and
the Senate, where all states received
two senators [music]
each.
As for slaves, they would be counted as
3/5 of a white person when it came to
allocating state representation based on
population. The slaving states like
South Carolina had wanted full
representation to boost their power, but
anti-slavery states managed to talk them
down. On September 17th, 1787,
39 delegates, including Washington,
Franklin, Madison, and Hamilton, signed
the final draft of the Constitution.
Ratification.
The Constitution still required
ratification by at least nine of the 13
states in order to become law. The
nation was soon divided between
Federalists who backed [music] the new
Constitution and the Anti-Federalists
who opposed it. Critics of the
Constitution argued that it took too
much power away from the states and
created a new tyranny in the federal
government. Others argued that the
system did not do enough to empower
common people [music] and would be ruled
by a narrow class of political elites.
Supporters countered [music] that the
new Constitution would provide the
federal government only with the
necessary powers to avoid the paralysis
that had plagued it under the current
articles.
Madison, Hamilton, and John Jay
published a collection of essays known
as The Federalist Papers, which not only
sought to gain support for the
Constitution, but also laid out key
principles of federalism, checks and
balances, and separation of powers that
would shape the nation's governance.
Delaware was the first state to ratify
the Constitution on December 7th, 1787.
Pennsylvania followed five days later,
and New Jersey five days after that.
Georgia and Connecticut ratified in
January of 1788. Massachusetts did the
same in February after intense debate,
where the backing of revolutionary icons
like Samuel Adams, John Hancock, and
Paul Revere probably tipped the balance
for the Federalists. Maryland's went in
April, South Carolina in May, and with
New Hampshire's ratification on June
21st, 1788, the Constitution had its
nine-state backing. Virginia, New York,
and North Carolina would ratify by the
end of 1789, leaving only Rhode Island,
who wouldn't settle on support until May
1790.
The framers had enough support for their
Constitution to get to work.
The first presidential election was
conducted through the Electoral College,
where state legislatures chose electors
who then cast votes for the presidency.
Most citizens did not vote directly in
this system.
There was never any question over who
would win. George Washington was the
most popular figure in the United States
with a proven track record of loyalty,
discipline, and humility that was
perfect for a fragile new government
concerned about ensuring the limits of
its own power. Washington was elected
unanimously by the delegates and sworn
in as the first president of the United
States on April 30th, 1789.
He faced the task of leading a new
nation with an untested political system
from an office whose powers were not
fully defined yet in a world where
democratic republics on this scale were
unheard of.
The great American experiment had
difficult days ahead if it wanted to
survive.
Building the American system.
Many details of the presidency were
undefined in 1789. Therefore, almost
anything Washington did could be
impressed upon the office as tradition.
So, Washington's choice to give an
inauguration speech became a custom
followed by every president after him.
So too was the title of Mr. President,
which Washington preferred to other
monarchical-sounding honorifics like
your Excellency. To staff his
government, Washington appointed the
first cabinet, including John Adams as
Vice President, Henry Knox as Secretary
of War, Thomas Jefferson as Secretary of
State, and Alexander Hamilton as
Secretary of the Treasury.
Even here, things were still unclear.
For example, Vice President Adams was
quite confused at what his job even was.
He was both the Vice President and the
President of the Senate, two roles with
undefined powers that left him
complaining that he'd been given the
most pointless office ever conceived by
man.
One of Washington's most pressing
concerns was to prop up the judiciary.
It was the least defined branch in the
Constitution, and Washington would help
give it much of its form. With the
Judiciary Act of 1789, and appointed
John Jay as its first Chief Justice.
He further expanded upon this with the
lower district courts with judges
appointed by the presidency to protect
[music]
and apply federal law. The federal
judiciary system that Washington
established remains the basis of the
system today.
Perhaps the most urgent concern for most
people was to enshrine people's rights
in the new system. The Constitution did
not provide clear protections for
people's individual rights and
liberties, a failure which its critics
had seized upon in the ratification
process. Several of the states, such as
Massachusetts, [music]
had only ratified the Constitution with
the condition that such protections be
added. Washington also agreed, calling
in his inaugural address for basic
rights to be impregnably fortified in a
new constitutional amendment.
Support for such a Bill of Rights was
not universal. Some critics argue that
the Constitution, by strictly outlining
the few powers the government had,
carried an implied protection of rights
that was good enough anyway. These
voices were overpowered though, [music]
and largely thanks to the works of James
Madison and Thomas Jefferson, the Bill
of Rights was introduced to Congress in
September 1789.
Proposed as a set of 10 distinct
amendments, the Bill of Rights included
provisions for religious freedom,
freedom of speech, the right to a fair
trial, and the right to bear arms. The
Bill of Rights was ratified by the
states over the following two years,
becoming enshrined in the Constitution
in December 1791.
Disaster in the Northwest.
Physical expansion went hand-in-hand
with the conceptual expansion of the US.
Washington would oversee the admittance
of three new states, Vermont in 1791,
Kentucky in 1792, and Tennessee in 1796.
Such expansion was anticipated by the
Constitution, and the Americans expected
that more states would join in time.
However, mixed among these successes
were a series of dismal failures in the
Northwest territories that soured
Washington's first years as president.
Since the implementation of the
Northwest Ordinance, the Indians in the
Northwest Territory had resisted
American settlers with ferocity and
success. A military man with newfound
presidential powers, one of Washington's
first acts was to deal with them.
Secretary Knox agreed, and they
dispatched General Josiah Harmar to lead
a campaign in the Northwest Territory.
The Northwest Indian War was far more
difficult than Washington anticipated.
The assorted alliance of Native
Americans, quietly backed by the
British, was a formidable match for the
untested American soldiers. Harmar's
mission was to destroy Native villages
and route their warriors. But, on
October 21st, 1790, it was Harmar's men
who were devastated in the Battle of
Kikianga in future Indiana. Hundreds of
Americans were killed or wounded, and
survivors said it was as if you could
have walked from one side of the river
to the other on the bodies left floating
in the water.
Eager to rectify the defeat, Washington
then ordered Major General Arthur St.
Clair to launch another campaign. On
November 4th, 1791, as St. Clair's army
marched against Indian settlements along
the Wabash River in Ohio, they were
attacked by over 1,000 Indian men led by
the Miami war chief, Little Turtle.
The battle became known as the St. Clair
defeat. Over 600 Americans were killed,
making it the single greatest defeat the
United States ever suffered at the hands
of the Native Americans.
With a fatality rate of 60%, it was
proportionally the worst defeat the US
Army has ever suffered in a major
battle.
Washington lays the blame firmly at St.
Clair's feet. The controversy prompted
Congress to begin the first ever
official investigation of the executive
branch, where a committee concluded that
Secretary Knox had failed to properly
supply the army, but no action was taken
to hold anyone to account. Instead,
Washington and Congress used the
disaster to expand the army, raise
military pay, and pass the Militia Acts
that forcibly enrolled all fighting-age
men in their state's militia to be
called upon when the need arose.
Economics and finance.
Fortunately for Washington, his His
efforts in other departments were much
more successful, especially in matters
of finance and the economy.
Washington's appointments of Alexander
Hamilton as Treasury Secretary proved to
be one of the best choices he ever made.
A shrewd, intelligent, and ambitious
man, Hamilton took on the immense task
of organizing the nation's financial
affairs. Hamilton began by consolidating
the nation's debt into a federal
national debt that the US could begin
repaying to establish its value to
creditors. To ensure the government had
more money to hand, he issued government
bonds and implemented new tariffs and
taxes. [music]
Hamilton also led the way on the
establishment of the US Mint to
standardize coinage across the US. His
economic reforms expanded federal power,
much to the anger of certain states,
mainly in the South, who resented the
consolidation of power in a distant
capital. To get these resistant
Southerners on board, Hamilton proposed
a compromise. The South would accept his
reforms, and in exchange, the capital
would be moved southward to a new state
along the Potomac River, at the middle
of the current US territory. The
Compromise of 1790 convinced the South
to support Hamilton's financial plan,
including federal assumption of state
debts, in exchange for moving the US
capital southward to a new site along
the Potomac River, which would later
become Washington, D.C. The crowning
achievement of Hamilton's financial
overhaul was probably the Bank of the
United States, which was chartered in
1791.
It oversaw the nation's debt, issued
loans to the government and private
individuals, and issued banknotes, among
other key financial roles. Critics
condemned it as an unconstitutional
expansion of government power, but
Washington stood by Hamilton's plans as
a necessary and proper tool.
Washington largely supported Hamilton's
work, but one man who generally didn't
was Thomas [music] Jefferson. Jefferson
and Hamilton represented two very
different approaches to government.
[music]
Hamilton favored a strong federal
government with broad authority to
promote trade and expand the nation's
wealth, while Jefferson favored a
limited federal government more in line
with the revolution's original aims and
was a strong believer in states' rights
and the agrarian values of small
landholders. In 1789, Hamilton founded
America's first official political party
in the Federalist Party to act as a
vehicle for his views and those of his
allies. In 1791, Jefferson and Madison
answered with their
Democratic-Republican
Party. Washington generally leans
towards the Federalists, but lamented
the harsh political split that was
emerging under his watch.
Federalists and Democratic-Republicans
butted heads on most of the major issues
of the day. Federalists lined up behind
Hamilton's economic reforms.
Democratic-Republicans condemned them as
tyrannical. When the French Revolution
broke out in 1789, the
Democratic-Republicans welcomed it as an
inspiring echo of their own
revolutionary ideals, while the
Federalists treated it as a radical and
destructive project that lacked the
restraint that had characterized the
American Revolution.
Almost no issue passed through Congress
or across the president's desk without
inspiring a bitter argument between the
two groups.
Jefferson resigned his position as
Secretary of State in 1793 after his
four-year term. However, he continued to
be deeply involved in political affairs
and organized opposition to various
Federalist causes over the next 3 years.
Whiskey Rebellion.
Among the many controversial things
Hamilton pushed through for his economic
program was the whiskey tax of 1791,
which imposed a tax on the sale and
distilling of spirits. The tax was hated
by most people and they evaded it where
they could. In 1794, authorities in
Pennsylvania attempted to crack down on
whiskey tax evaders, but when local
distillers heard about the arrival of a
federal marshal and a tax collector,
they attacked them. Both men survived,
but the door of violence had opened. The
Whiskey Rebellion spread rapidly through
rural Pennsylvania, recalling Shays'
Rebellion years earlier, which had shown
the federal government to be weak
[music] and impotent. Washington would
not allow such weakness for the new
government. The Militia Act passed in
the wake of the St. Clair defeat allowed
for the president to mobilize a
staggering 13,000 men in the militia to
suppress the rebellion.
Washington personally led the armies to
confront the rebels who dispersed in the
face of such an overwhelming show of
power.
The strong response to the Whiskey
Rebellion was a powerful contrast with
the impotent scene in the federal
government's response to Shays'
Rebellion years earlier. At the same
time as Washington gathering the militia
to put down the Whiskey Rebellion, the
US finally got the upper hand in the
Northwest Indian War, too. With a clear
victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers
in August of 1794, the Indians were
forced to seek peace. The Treaty of
Greenville in 1795 saw the Indians
accept US control of the Northwest
Territory and ended major fighting over
it.
With success against rebels and Indians,
the new federal government had proven
that it could do a better job dealing
with crises [music]
that had paralyzed the previous federal
system.
Foreign policy. Washington similarly
proved effective at navigating the
perils of foreign policy. Washington
kept quiet [music] when the French
Revolution swept through France in 1789,
much to Jefferson's annoyance. Jefferson
and the Democratic Republicans believed
America should enthusiastically support
the French in their revolution, just as
the French had supported them. However,
Washington and the Federalists were not
convinced of the merits, leadership, or
self-restraint of their French
counterparts.
When the French Revolutionary Wars
erupted between France and Britain in
1792, the French urged the Americans to
join them. Citing the 1778
Franco-American Alliance, the French
wanted America to attack British ships
as part of a shared Republican war
effort. Jefferson, ever the Francophile,
completely agreed. However, Washington
was firmly opposed to getting America
involved in an unnecessary war. He
recognized that trade with Britain was
essential to America's economy and
didn't want to alienate the British.
Besides, the 1778 alliance had been
signed with King Louis the 16th, who the
French revolutionaries had just
beheaded. Surely, the treaty was no
longer valid.
To be safe, Washington issues the
Neutrality Proclamation of 1793,
swearing off any involvement with France
or Britain's wars.
Angry, the French envoy Edmond Charles
Genet attempted to recruit Americans to
join the war privately anyway.
Washington complains to France and got
Genet recalled. But upon learning that
the revolutionary government was likely
to behead him, Washington gave Genet
sanctuary instead. The resulting
breakdown in relations with France was a
blow to Jefferson and the Republicans.
Relations with the other European powers
improved though, and 1794 Washington
sent Chief Justice John Jay to negotiate
the Jay Treaty to secure British
evacuation from forts in the disputed
Northwest Territory and establish
regular trade relations. Then the next
year, Pinckney's Treaty settled disputes
with Spain, restoring American
navigation rights to the Mississippi and
settling on the border between American
and Spanish territory.
By the time Washington's second term was
drawing to a close in 1796, he had
clearly done an admirable job. Many
people, such as John Adams, expected
[music] him to stay in the office for as
long as he lived, and had he wanted to,
he probably could have. However,
Washington was a man of principle above
all else. As he had done with his
military commission in 1783, he was
ready to lay aside his power when the
time came. And in doing so, established
the traditional two-term limit that has
bound almost every future president.
Washington left behind a robust system
ready to meet the challenges of the
future, but it was one torn by bitter
political division that would only get
worse as John Adams and Thomas Jefferson
began their fight to inherit his office.
Factional strife.
The 1796
election
was a testament settled into the [music]
country. John Adams, running as a
Federalist, went head-to-head with
Thomas Jefferson as the
Democratic-Republican candidate. Once
colleagues under Washington, Adams and
Jefferson now stood as rivals,
symbolizing the growing political
divide.
The Federalists argued for more central
power and feared that the fledgling
United States would collapse without a
firm federal hand. The
Democratic-Republicans wanted a limited
federal government with power kept in
the states.
The Federalists saw the
Democratic-Republicans as misguided,
destructive fools who would replicate
the bloody chaos of the French
Revolution, while the latter saw the
former as would-be tyrants crafting a
tyranny no better than the one the
revolution replaced. Each saw the other
as a deadly threat to democracy. In this
way, the 1796 election would set the
tone for every US election held ever
since.
Unlike modern elections, though, there
was not much of a campaign. Adams and
Jefferson did not make electoral
speeches or [music] make public appeals
to the delegates who elected them, since
there was no public vote for the
presidency.
The presidency was determined through
political maneuvering among the 138
state electors rather than a public
vote. In the end, the result was the
closest thing to a compromise the two
dominant parties were capable of. Adams
won the presidency by three votes, but
under the rules of the Constitution as
they were at the time, Jefferson's
second-place position earned him the
office of vice president.
John Adams and the challenges of the
presidency.
It was hoped that this shared
administration would heal the political
divides that the election had torn open.
Those hopes came to nothing.
While Adams and Jefferson maintained
mutual respect and occasional
friendship, they would spend the next
four years locked in constant [music]
disagreement. Meanwhile, the two
factions at large got only more hostile
to each other. Adams now faced the
intimidating task of following
Washington, who as a sacrosanct national
hero commanded support or at least
respect from almost everyone. Adams had
his admirers. He'd once been one of the
chief architects of the revolution and
constitution after all, but he was not
the hero Washington was. Adams'
presidency was constantly judged in the
shadow of his predecessor.
Adams' reserved personality and lack of
political charisma, combined with
Washington's towering legacy, made his
presidency feel like a step down to
many. Another challenge came from the
lack of worthy public servants. The
ruling elite was made up of wealthy
people, but their wealth was not as
stable as many of them liked, and their
roles in government or Congress were not
particularly well paid. As a result,
fewer men were willing to set aside
their private affairs to serve in
government. Alexander Hamilton, for
example, had stepped down from his role
in the Treasury in 1795 to return to his
business activities, and Henry Knox
reportedly left his post because of the
dismal salary.
In Congress, there were frequent
complaints of members failing to attend
votes so they could pursue private
interests. As one congressman complained
about his colleague, he has thought it
more for his interests to speculate than
to attend his duty in Congress and is
gone home.
With Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee
joining the Union in 1796, and with
settlement intensifying in the Northwest
after 1795, the challenges of an
ever-expanding nation continued to grow.
For example, the factional split was
already taking on a regional element
with Federalists predominating in the
north and Democratic-Republicans gaining
a stronghold in the south. Slavery was
part of the explanation for the latter.
The Republicans favored states' rights
and southern states were eager to
protect slavery from any abolitionist
turn in the federal government. The
success of the slave revolution in
Haiti, launched in 1791, and by 1797
having seized control of the country and
wiped out most of its white population,
was a source of great anxiety for the
slaving states. Abolition proposals were
defeated in Congress in 1797 and 1800,
but that they even existed was a sign to
the south that they'd be better off with
reduced federal power.
Since we started this channel, we have
been obsessed with historical maps.
Since some of you might like maps as
well, [music] we created a few products
for you. High-resolution downloads and
museum-quality prints. Go to
knowledgeia.co and have a look. If you
want to own one, use my code in the
description below. Now, back to the
video.
France and the XYZ Affair.
Conflict at home was one challenge
during the Adams presidency, but
conflict abroad was equally troublesome.
Washington's assertion of neutrality in
1793, followed by the Jay Treaty with
England in 1794, had soured relations
with the French. Adams and the
Federalists were more Anglophiles than
Francophiles, and France knew this, so
they naturally took a hostile stance to
the Adams presidency. They snubbed
American diplomatic efforts and declared
all American ships carrying British
goods as legitimate targets in 1797.
Fearing war, Adams summoned a special
session of Congress who authorized the
expansion of the Navy and the calling up
of 80,000 militia men in anticipation of
a conflict with their former ally.
Jefferson and the Republicans were
appalled. They blamed Adams for the
breakdown in relations and insisted that
France was about to destroy Britain
anyway. So anything less than an
alliance with France was suicide. Adams
was not convinced, but he did not want
war either. So he dispatched a
diplomatic mission to Paris in late 1797
to try to smooth things over. These
envoys received humiliating treatment.
The French government demanded an
apology for Adams's hostility demanding
that Congress covers any debts France
owed to American citizens and its
neutrality and join France's war. And to
top it off with a considerable loan to
the personal use of unnamed French
officials only listed as X, [music] Y,
and Z. In other words, a bribe. Only
then would France consider receiving the
diplomatic mission.
When Adams got word of the outrageous
demands, he wrote off the mission but
kept the details of the absurd proposals
private. Jefferson, believing that Adams
was concealing information for the
purpose of provoking France and
undermining pro-French Republicans, made
it a scandal and forced Adams to
disclose the information. To Jefferson's
dismay, the publication of France's
demands in the XYZ affair had a totally
opposite effect. The American people
were outraged and pro-French feeling in
the US practically collapsed overnight.
[music] It was so intense that
Jefferson's Republicans had to publicly
disavow France or risk being treated as
traitors.
Escalation, sedition, and aliens.
The XYZ Affair catapulted America and
France towards conflict. In July 1798,
Congress even authorized the US Navy to
engage French vessels who attempted to
seize American ships. There was no
official declaration of war, but the two
nations were now in a state of quasi war
at sea.
With this development, Adams and the
Federalists had a genuine fear that
pro-French elements in America might
trigger a revolt or civil war. To avoid
this, they passed a series of
controversial laws targeted against
dissidents and immigrants who Adams
believed might be loyal to France.
The Naturalization Act increased the
time required for an immigrant to become
an American citizen from 5 to 14 years
on the belief that recent immigrants
tended to have more French
Democratic-Republican attitudes and
should be excluded from society long
enough for these attitudes to fade.
The Alien Friends Act allowed for the
deportation of foreigners without trial,
and the Alien Enemies Act allowed for
the arrest and deportation of the
citizens of any country the US was at
war with. All three acts were unsubtle
attacks on French immigrants or
pro-French attitudes among new
immigrants. The Democratic-Republicans
immediately attacked the laws as
dangerous overreach that were designed
to target them.
But even more controversial was the
Sedition Act. This made it a crime to
publish false or malicious statements
against the US government, Congress, or
the president himself. Of course, what
qualified as false or malicious was left
vague. It was, in effect, a law
criminalizing any potential criticism of
the government. The
Democratic-Republicans saw it as a
direct attack on the freedoms of speech
and the press that the First Amendment
[music] protected. Their fears were
well-founded. 25 people, including
journalists, publishers, and
Democratic-Republican public figures,
>> [music]
>> were arrested and convicted under the
Sedition Act by the time Adams left
office. This attempt to curb criticism
of the federal government proved deeply
unpopular among the American people.
Some of the men persecuted under the
law, like Vermont Congressman Matthew
Lyon, were turned into folk martyrs by
regular Americans who were disgusted at
Adams' overreach. The harsh law also
encouraged the states to assert their
rights. Jefferson and Madison secretly
penned the Kentucky and Virginia
Resolutions of 1798 and 1799,
respectively, which asserted the right
of states to nullify unconstitutional
federal laws. This theory became an
essential element of later conflicts
between state and federal rights, such
as in the Civil War.
The Alien and Sedition Acts did for the
Federalists what the declassification of
the XYZ Affair documents had done for
the Democratic-Republicans.
What was supposed to be a blow against
the other side was instead a massive
shot in their own [music] foot. Adams
became deeply unpopular, and the
controversy over the Republican
connection to the French quickly fell
out of the spotlight.
The 1800s election.
The toppling of the first French
Republic by Napoleon in November 1799
brought a welcome change in French
policy. Napoleon rolled back hostility
against America, and Adams seized upon
the opening to negotiate the Treaty of
Mortefontaine in September of 1800,
ending the Quasi-War and restoring a
relationship of free trade and
friendship between the two nations.
2,000 American merchant vessels had been
seized, and several hundred men were
dead [music] on both sides. While a
diplomatic victory for Adams, it
deprived the Federalists of their strong
anti-French argument against the
Democratic-Republicans.
Meanwhile, the Alien and Sedition Acts
remained in place as ammo to barrage
Adams in the upcoming election of 1800.
Newspapers were nothing new in the
states, but the age of political
partisanship fueled a war of words in
the press that inflamed political
conflict. Despite the Sedition Act
shutting down many Republican papers,
new ones emerged faster than they could
be suppressed. In 1800 alone, 85 new
Republican papers were published.
Accusations of tyranny and treachery
were flung both ways, and each side
could point to the dramatic events of
Adams's term as proof for their side's
success and the other's failings.
Republican papers like the National
Gazette took aim at John Adams as an
overweight tyrant who they mockingly
referred to as His Rotundity.
Federalist papers like the Gazette's of
the United States counted with charges
of Republicans as French traitors and
slandered Jefferson as an atheist. In
the end, Jefferson emerged victorious
with 73 votes, though tied with his
running mate, Aaron Burr. It fell to
Alexander Hamilton, now returned to the
political arena to convince the
delegates to break the tie. Of course,
Hamilton may have disliked Jefferson,
but he utterly despised Burr. Through
intense political maneuvering, Hamilton
ultimately influenced the delegates to
break the tie in Jefferson's favor.
Hanging like a shadow over events was
the death of George Washington in
December of 1799.
The death of the revolutionary hero, and
the one man who could stand above
political factionalism, was an ominous
sign. Washington's warnings about
political factionalism had gone
unheeded, and his absence [music]
left a leadership void in the young
nation.
As Jefferson prepares to assume office,
he did so carried upon a wave of
anti-federalist hatred that was
reflected right back in equal measure,
and which would define the tenure of the
third president of the United States.
Thomas Jefferson's victory in the
election of 1800 was something of a
revolution. With a significant shift in
federal policy favoring limited
government, lower taxes, and agrarian
interests, it was the kind of abrupt
political transformation that few
nations could have endured peacefully.
For all the vitriol thrown about in the
election season, the peaceful transfer
of power between different parties was
an encouraging sign of the strength of
American democracy.
Adams and Jefferson exchanged letters
until the day of the inauguration, but
this symbol of bipartisanship was
short-lived.
In his last letter before leaving
office, Adams wrote with some pain that
Jefferson had declined to offer any
sympathies upon the recent death of
Adams' son, but still wished Jefferson a
quiet and prosperous administration.
Jefferson did not respond, and the two
men would not exchange letters again for
over a decade.
The political climate was too polarized
for such friendships to persist, and
[music] Jefferson was too preoccupied to
make the effort. In this video, we will
follow the first few years of
Jefferson's presidency as America
experienced international conflict,
massive territorial expansion, and
constitutional shake-ups that rewrote
the relationships of government.
The Jeffersonian Revolution.
Symbolic of the new age of American
politics was Jefferson's move to the new
nation capital at Washington, D.C.
Planned a decade earlier and championed
by Washington, the city remained
unimpressive with muddy streets and
half-finished buildings.
Adams had actually moved into the White
House in the last months of 1800, but
Jefferson was the first president to
live out his term there.
As a Democratic-Republican,
Jefferson wanted to present himself as a
man of the common people to contrast the
aristocratic airs of Adams. He wore
simple clothes, [music] ate simple food,
and even traveled to his inauguration on
foot.
He declined to give a State of the Union
speech and wrote to Congress instead.
While he was no stranger to politics, he
had lost touch with the ever-changing
faces of Washington's political class.
In fact, he did not recognize the men
now serving in Congress, and when
several of them complained that
Jefferson was passing them without
giving some sign of respect, he was
embarrassingly forced to admit that he
didn't even know who they were.
He would attempt to rectify this over
the course of his presidency by hosting
private dinners with every [music]
congressman. Jefferson's presidency was
shaped by his political ideals. He
favored small government [music] over
large, farmers and small landowners over
manufacturers and merchants, and the
French over the British. Inevitably,
Jefferson began to undo much of what
Adams had done before him. For example,
he repealed the hated Naturalization
Act, and the Sedition and Alien Friends
Acts were allowed to expire in their
natural term by 1802.
He aggressively [music] cut spending on
the army and the navy, while eliminating
as many taxes as he could get his hands
on, including the hated whiskey tax that
had proven so troublesome in
Washington's term.
Jefferson also blocked pending judicial
appointments made by his predecessor,
but that would prove to be more
troublesome [music] than he expected.
Marbury versus Madison
Before leaving office, John Adams issued
a flurry of last-minute appointments to
stack the judiciary with Federalists.
These midnight judges were supposed to
frustrate the new administration's
political agenda, but not everything was
ready before Adams left. [music] Many of
the commission letters for these
appointments were still sitting on the
president's desk when Jefferson arrived.
Jefferson ordered his Secretary of State
James Madison not to deliver the
commissions, and therefore exclude these
Federalists from power.
Obviously, the men who were due to
receive these commissions were not
pleased, least of all William Marbury,
who took Madison all the way to the
Supreme Court to resolve the dispute.
The court did decide that Madison's
refusal to deliver the commission was
illegal, but they also ruled that the
section of Judiciary Act of 1789, under
which Marbury brought the case before
the court in the first place was
unconstitutional.
Since the law was unconstitutional, the
court deemed that it had no authority on
the matter and thus could not force
Madison to deliver the illegally
withheld commissions.
This was the single most significant
ruling the Supreme Court would ever
make. Chief Justice John Marshall had
established the power [music]
of judicial review, that is, the power
to declare any act of the other two
branches of government to be in
violation of the Constitution and
therefore illegitimate.
The significance of this decision was
not immediately apparent, but judicial
review has been the basis of many of the
court's most significant rulings on
matters ranging from abortion to racial
segregation.
Jefferson's America.
It was natural to expect that changes
like these would occur as the
Constitution was tested against reality.
After all, with how much the US was
changing in such a short time, growing
pains were inevitable. The 1800 census
placed the population at 5.3 million,
which included a population of about 1
million slave. The birth rate in the
United States was seven children per
woman, almost double that of Europe,
although it would decline in the 19th
century. This ever-growing population
set down new towns and new states at a
rapid pace, which transformed the
landscape.
Foreign observers were stunned at the
rapid growth and transformation of
American society. The Americans lived
and breathed democracy and liberty in a
way that seemed bizarre to foreigners,
even French and British ones [music] who
might share the most with them. Voter
participation among the admittedly
narrow electorate soared between 1790
and 1810. One observer wrote that
Americans dread everything that preaches
constraint, while others noted how
deeply the Americans had imbued the idea
of the equality of man. The lowest here
stand erect and crouch not before any
man, wrote another traveler.
Slaves, of course, notwithstanding.
As much as Jefferson idealized the
simple farmer, there was no escaping the
fact that the trade was vital and
dominant in affairs. From one end of the
continent to the other, wrote the New
York physician Samuel Mitchell, the
universal roar is commerce, commerce at
all events, commerce.
Still, most foreigners saw the Americans
as rough and rude, lacking the manners
or self-restraint of a properly ordered
society.
Public safety challenges in Pennsylvania
were a growing concern, with reports
indicating higher incident rates than
those in London.
Keeping this population informed of
events was the press, a firm majority of
which were staunch Democratic
Republicans. After the attempted
suppression under Adams, Jefferson's
presidency saw a flourishing of
Republican newspapers supporting his
agenda.
The Federalists countered with their own
litany of newspapers, such as Hamilton's
Evening Post, that launched what some
historians have dubbed a journalistic
arms race that still rages to this day.
Foreigners struggled to understand the
US, and in many ways Jefferson didn't
help either.
Jefferson's approach to foreign affairs
was predictable to anyone who had
followed his beliefs thus far. He was
unapologetically pro-French Revolution
and was constantly weary of the British.
However, the tyrannical rule of Napoleon
unsettled him, and like many admirers of
the revolution, he regretted that its
high-flying ideals had descended into
despotism.
Jefferson's modest demeanor and
disregard for social hierarchy and
protocol led to diplomatic tensions. For
example, when hosting foreign
dignitaries, Jefferson [music] shunned
the strict social conventions that
European elites were accustomed to. When
Minister Anthony Merry of Great Britain
arrived to assume his post as
ambassador, Jefferson reportedly greeted
him in a pair of slippers. He also
invited French and British
representatives to the same formal
dinners, much to the offense of both
nations who were at war at the time.
In all likelihood, Jefferson was being
irritating to the British on purpose,
but his simple manners were a notable
departure [music]
from the leaders of other nations he
dealt with.
Free trade remains the watchword of
American economic and foreign policy.
Jefferson was a firm believer in open
[music] trade between nations and
resented anyone who might interfere with
it, be they the British closing ports to
rival nations or the Barbary pirates of
the Mediterranean preying upon American
merchants.
The North African Barbary states of
Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli had
long profited from piracy against
foreign vessels. The British and French
had learned to pay them off to avoid
attacks on their ships, but the
Americans were slow to make such
arrangements. After the revolution,
American ships had been regular prey for
the Barbary pirates, a problem that
Jefferson had wrestled with before
during Washington's presidency. Adams
had chosen a diplomatic route, offering
[music] $1.25 million in tribute to
ensure the safety of American vessels.
By the time Jefferson took office, this
was 20% of the federal government's
budget. [music]
To protect free trade and reduce this
drain on federal finances, Jefferson
sent a squadron of navy ships to the
Mediterranean in June of 1801 to protect
American vessels by any means necessary.
Jefferson was still reluctant to commit
too many resources to the First Barbary
War, but the accidental beaching of the
USS Philadelphia on the shores of
Tripoli in October of 1803 with the
capture of all its crew forced his hand.
The Pasha of Tripoli ransomed the crew
at $1.7 million,
higher than the entire military budget
of the United States at that time. After
1803, the First Barbary went on to
involve additional ships [music] and US
Marines, but did not end the piracy or
the tributes.
The Louisiana Purchase.
The expansion of American power on the
other side of the world was one thing,
but there was plenty of work to do
managing expansion upon the US's own
borders, too. With the successful
pacification of the Northwest Territory,
American settlers had been flooding into
the lands along the Ohio River and were
now numerous enough to meet the criteria
for statehood that Jefferson had helped
lay out in the Northwest Ordinance. On
February 19th, 1803, Jefferson approved
Ohio's territorial and [music]
constitutional arrangements, admitting
it as the 17th state. However, Congress
did not approve a formal resolution
confirming this, meaning Ohio
technically wasn't a state, a fact that
wasn't noticed and retroactively fixed
until the 1950s. But Ohio was a footnote
in the territorial developments of
Jefferson's presidency compared to what
he gained from France. Napoleon believed
that France's interests in America were
unnecessary. They had never truly
reestablished meaningful control over
the Louisiana territory after reclaiming
it from the British, and the Haitian
revolt had deprived it of its most
valuable American colonies anyway. In
constant need of money and with his
country's relationship with the US
recently patched up, Napoleon made a
staggering offer to Jefferson. The sale
of all 820,000
square miles of the Louisiana territory
to the United States for a mere 15
million dollars.
This was an extraordinarily generous
offer equating to roughly $2 per square
mile in today's terms, but Jefferson was
in a tough position.
As a staunch Democratic-Republican,
he was supposed to be against any
expansion of government power, and he
was supposed to obey the Constitution to
the letter.
The Constitution gave the president no
authority to purchase land to expand the
US, and doing so would be an obvious
overreach. However, the prospect of
doubling the size of the United States
for such a paltry sum simply couldn't be
ignored. Besides, Jefferson rationalized
that all of the new land could provide
for millions of those small-scale
farmers and freeholders that he saw as
the pillars of American freedom.
Prudence won out over principle, and on
April 30th, 1803, Jefferson's
representative formally signed the
treaty approving the purchase. Critics
complained about the overreach and the
cost, but it was impossible to deny the
value of the move. The Louisiana
territory became part of the United
States on December 20th, 1803, doubling
the size of the nation overnight and
containing lands that would one day form
all or part of the territory of 15 US
states.
By the end of 1803, Jefferson had
undoubtedly overseen a transformative
period in American history, though not
all developments aligned with his
vision.
In just a few short years, the
foundations for much of the rest of
American history had been laid. Marbury
versus Madison had remade the role of
the Supreme [music] Court. The explosion
in population and the press had forever
changed public discourse. America had
launched its first foreign war against
the Barbary pirates and the Louisiana
Purchase would enable the creation of
thousands of new towns, cities, and
societies home to millions of people.
The seeds of the American Revolution had
already bloomed into a thriving and
powerful nation, but Jefferson's era
showed that America was far from
finished growing. The seeds of new
developments, of its future greatness,
and future failings were still being
sown and would continue to bloom as
American history marched ever onward.
[music]
This video was very interesting to work
on. If you enjoyed it as much as we did,
hit the like button right now and click
the bell before you leave so you don't
miss the next time we uncover
>> [music]
>> history mysteries. See you next time.